---
title: "Debiased Contrastive Loss for Collaborative Filtering"
date: 2023-08-09
categories:
  - Published
tags:
  - Collaborative Filtering
  - Debiased Contrastive Learning
  - Popularity Bias
  - Sample Bias
  - Matrix Factorization
  - Graph Neural Networks
---

Collaborative filtering (CF) is the most fundamental technique in recommender systems, which reveals user preference by implicit feedback. Generally, binary cross-entropy or bayesian personalized ranking are usually employed as the loss function to optimize model parameters. Recently, the sampled softmax loss has been proposed to enhance the sampling efficiency, which adopts an in-batch sample strategy. However, it suffers from the sample bias issue, which unavoidably introduces false negative instances, resulting inaccurate representations of users’ genuine interests. To address this problem, we propose a debiased contrastive loss, incorporating a bias correction probability to alleviate the sample bias. We integrate the proposed method into several matrix factorizations (MF) and graph neural network-based (GNN) recommendation models. Besides, we theoretically analyze the effectiveness of our methods in automatically mining the hard negative instances. Experimental results on three public benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed debiased contrastive loss can augment several existing MF and GNN-based CF models and outperform popular learning objectives in the recommendation. Additionally, we demonstrate that our method substantially enhances training efficiency.

#### Authors
Zhuang Liu, Yunpu Ma, Haoxuan Li, Marcel Hildebrandt, Yuanxin Ouyang, Zhang Xiong

#### Conference
CIKM 2023

#### Link
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-40289-0_8